Where does it go?
SCREAMING
It’s been a bit much lately,
what with Dad suddenly dying
and finding out
he had a secret love child.
Oh, come here.
You could be identical twins!
Dad had an affair. Not great, but
because of it, you’ve got a sister.
You’ve got me.
Your dad was my sexual zenith.
That man is dead to me.
He’s dead to all of us!
He’s dead!
The other One.
Coming soon to BBC One and iPlayer.
BAFTA award winning series
Ambulance.
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, the social care
Minister and former deputy chair of
the Conservative Party, Helen
whately.
Whately. Labour’s new Shadow
whately. Labour’s new Shadow
Secretary
Whately. Labour’s new Shadow
Secretary of State for Scotland, Ian
Murray. john
Murray. John Swinney, Deputy First
Murray. john Swinney, Deputy First
Minister
Murray. John Swinney, Deputy First
Minister and Education Secretary for
the SNP government, he
the SNP government, hejoins us
Minister and Education Secretary for
the SNP government, he joins us from
Persia. layla
Persia. Layla McCay, a trained
Persia. layla Md’ay, a trained
psychiatrist
Persia. Layla McCay, a trained
psychiatrist who specialises in
pub“:
public health. She is currently
director of international relations
at the NHS Confederation. And down
the line from Edinburgh, Scotland
editor of the Spectator magazine and
columnist for the Scottish edition
of the Times, Alex Massie. Good
evening, welcome to my guest here
and to my guest down the line, and I
am delighted to say we have a live
audience on the programme tonight
throughout, it is almost going to be
like old times, not quite, but we
have got you virtually, all in
Glasgow. I am so pleased you can
Glasgow. I am so pleased you ran
join us this
Glasgow. I am so pleased you can
join us this evening. And you can
join us this evening. And you ran
join
join in at home on social media.
Let’s start with our first question
from Alison Goldie. Good evening,
Fiona, good evening, panel. Given
the success of track and trace, we
rely significantly on the
Government’s
Government’s trust and the rules,
Government’s trust and the mles,
has this
Government’s trust and the rules,
has this been undermined in any way
by the events of this last week? It
feels like we have done nothing else
but talk about the events of last
week, of course Dominic Cummings.
Ian Murray. Thank you for the
question, Alison, it gets to the nub
of how we get out of this epidemic,
test, trace and isolate is the only
“Y
way forward ,
test, trace and isolate is the only
way forward, and in the last week,
with the saga we have had with the
Prime Minister, the Government, his
integrity in tatters, we have seen
it is one rule for the Prime
it is one mle for the Prime
Minister
it is one rule for the Prime
Minister and his team,
Ministerand his team, and
it is one rule for the Prime
Minister and his team, and one rule
Minister and his team, and one mle
for the public.
Minister and his team, and one rule
for the public. We need every single
member of the public to be
absolutely in touch with these rules
absolutely in touch with these mles
and abiding
absolutely in touch with these rules
and abiding by them, otherwise we
will never get to the end of this
pandemic. The word trust, I think it
should be called tax, test, trace,
should be rallad tax, test, trace,
isolate
should be called tax, test, trace,
isolate and trust. The Scottish
Government has a big question to
answer, because if you go back to
the very start of this pandemic in
Edinburgh, at a conference in a city
centre hotel, and the public were
not told about that. The reason it
is such a difficult story for the
Scottish Government is twofold, one,
you need the public to be involved
in this so that they can be used to
in this so that they ran be used to
help track and
in this so that they can be used to
help track and trace the people who
help track and trace the peopla who
have
help track and trace the people who
have potentially been infected, they
need to trust in the system.
And secondly, you need that trust
from the public so you can use them
to isolate and you can also use them
to make their own choices about
whether or not they
see family members.
So trust is the nub of how
a track and trace system works.
But given how critical you are
of Dominic Cummings,
saying it’s one rule for him and one
rule for everybody else,
why didn’t Labour ask for him to go?
Well, Keir Starmer said very
clearly, if he was Prime Minister,
he would have sacked him...
Yes, but he didn’tjoin the other
parties in asking him to go.
Well, I think when the Conservatives
are tearing themselves apart
over this kinds of issue,
there’s now over 60
Conservative MPs who’ve publicly
said that he should go,
there’s over 70 that have e—mailed
back their constituents,
of which we’ve all had thousands
of e—mails about this.
The public are incredibly angry,
and it goes back to Douglas Ross,
thejunior Scotland Office minister
resigned this week,
and he said in his letter,
and I think this is crucial,
that many of the public have
made huge sacrifices,
including not being able to hold
the hand of loved ones
when they’re dying, and how could he
possibly say to his constituents
that they were wrong
and Dominic Cummings was right?
And I think that sums this
issue up in a sentence.
Layla, can I ask you,
as the sort of scientific voice
on our panel here this evening,
do you feel that compliance may have
been undermined by the events
of the last few days?
Well, it’s interesting, isn’t it?
Because it’s not exactly
about what Dominic Cummings
did or he didn’t do —
the question is really
about what is the impact of that.
And what we’ve heard from our
members who are CEOs of hospitals,
GPs, all across the health system,
people are worried
that public health messages
are being undermined.
They’re already hearing
that people are making decisions
they might not have otherwise made,
and that’s really worrying,
because in orderfor these public
measures, whether lockdown,
test, track and trace,
any of these things to work,
we need to have a really clear
message that isn’t open
to too much interpretation
and discretion.
And we need to have
this public feeling that
we’re all in it together.
And I think that for those reasons,
one of the hospital CEOs
said to us recently that this
could actually be one of
the biggest risks to public health
since lockdown began.
So I think that all of these
are key considerations
as we think about what next.
Alison, could I come back to you?
Has it had any impact
on whether you will be
more or less compliant,
as we’re going into test,
track, or test and protect,
or test and isolate now?
Well, no, from a personal level,
I would follow the guidelines.
I think I’ve got enough
integrity to do that.
But I do think that it will have
an impact on some people
who are just fed up with the whole
idea that someone can get away
with something when the rest
are not supposed to.
Anyone on the panel think
actually it really won’t make
that much of a difference,
that people will still do
what they feel they need to do
in the current circumstances?
This is deeply unscientific poll.
None of you are
putting your hands up.
Ah, yes, Eileen.
Hi, Fiona, I believe that
it undermines the message,
like Alison said,
but had it been an MP,
he wouldn’t have got away with it.
If it was anyone else with it,
they wouldn’t have got away with it.
The fact that this person
is so close and so influential
to Borisjohnson,
that’s what rocks my confidence.
What I’m asking you
is whether or not you think
it’ll make any difference in terms
of compliance generally.
Yes, it will.
Like Alison said, the people
with integrity out there,
there’s people who do the right
thing for society, for their family.
There’s other people,
like Dominic Cummings,
looks for the loophole
and looks for the cheap way.
You’re cheating society
by doing this.
Ultimately, you’re
putting lives at risk.
Behaviour breeds behaviour,
especially with someone
so influential.
Matthew, let’s hearfrom you.
Just on that point, Fiona,
Ithink, you know,
with all due respect,
Ian, to what you’ve said there,
I mean, if I’m not mistaken,
Stephen Kenny took it upon himself
to go to his father’s place
to sing Happy Birthday.
I mean, he did it quite blatantly
as well, quite literally
in front of the cameras.
So I think this...
I mean, infairness,
he said he was dropping off
essential shopping for them
that they couldn’t get,
that’s what he said at the time.
Yes, but it wasn’t done in an overly
discreet fashion, you know,
the filming of what happened
there as such.
And I don’t have any political
allegiance one way or another,
but I think the public,
from what I can sense anyway,
people I know are probably
just a little bit fed up
with the politicising
of things as well.
All we’re after is just,
if we are all in it together,
like the slogan says,
that indeed those people in
public life, like it or loathe it,
you have to adhere to that,
probably to a greater
extent than the general
populace because it comes
with the territory, unfortunately.
Alex Massie.
Yes, I mean, look, Ithink...
There were an awful lot of people
all across the United Kingdom who,
even if they haven’t necessarily
voted for BorisJohnson
or thought much of him,
previously wished him well,
they recognised it was important
the Government had a grip on
this crisis, rose to the challenge,
rose to the occasion.
And I think those sentiments
were reinforced, obviously,
when the Prime Minister
fell ill himself.
And the events of the last week,
I think, has enormously dented
public confidence in
the UK Government’s ability
to handle this crisis,
because people have seen,
and they have understood, and it’s
been based on their own experience
and the difference between the way
they behaved and the way
that, in this instance,
Dominic Cummings has behaved,
and they can tell the difference
between these two things.
Plenty of people, you know, you can
sympathise with the predicament
in which Dominic Cummings
and his family found themselves,
while recognising at the same time
that many, many other people,
hundreds of thousands,
perhaps millions of people,
have faced comparable situations
and they have obeyed
the Government advice,
followed the Government advice
and stayed at home.
And it’s not unreasonable to
expect people at the highest levels
of government to do likewise.
And, you know, Ialso do
think that this scandal,
it has become a scandal,
it started as a story,
but the Government’s reaction to it
has turned into a scandal,
it has fatally wounded
a lot of the messaging
that is out there at the moment.
It is entirely understandable
in some ways that people will take
the message that if there is one
rule for government advisers
and a different rule
for the general public,
that they will take the view
that they will
do their own thing too,
regardless of what
the official advice says.
And the Government’s
arrogant dismissal of this,
the suggestion that
it isn’t a story at all
and that it’s time to move on,
won’t do.
I mean, you know, as as my colleague
Esther Webber said in the Times
the other day, you know,
the problem with the "move on" idea
is that the general public
isn’t yet convinced
that moving on
is an essentialjourney.
Keith, you’ve got your hand up.
Yeah, I mean, I’m going
to disappoint Alex here by saying,
yeah, I think we should do
exactly that, move on.
I mean, for you political
commentators and members
of the opposition party,
the Dominic Cummings story must be
Christmas, your birthday,
new year rolled into one,
you must be loving it.
I mean, Emily Maitlis has
had to take the day off
because of over excitement.
I mean, yeah, move on.
I can’t be bothered,
I’ve got a mind of my mind,
a mind of my own, you know,
I know what to do
and what not to do.
What Dominic Cummings
does or doesn’t do
has no impact on me at all.
And I’m more interested
in whether there’s self—raising
flour and eggs on the supermarket
shelf than listening
to Dominic Cummings stories.
50, Alex, yeah, let’s move on.
Well, this will be music
to your ears, Helen.
Yeah, and Keith’s position
is more what I’m beginning
to hear coming through,
that people feel that
there’s been a lot of talk
about what Dominic Cummings
did or didn’t do.
But actually what really matters
is us having the pandemic under
control and being able to get back
to life that much nearer to...
Is that what your constituents
were saying to you
when it first broke, this story?
Well, of course, I’ve received
e—mails from constituents,
as every MP has, and Ian has done
so, and I’ve received emails
from constituents who talk
about some of the sacrifices
they’ve made and things that
they have missed out on.
And I don’t think
we should suggest for a moment
that lockdown is anything
other than very hard.
But that’s why what’s
really important
is that we now have the infection
rate under control and falling,
and that we’re in a position to
ease some of the lockdown measures
and launching the NHS Test
and Trace, as referred to by Alison,
because that is so important
to continuing to keep under control.
And are you worried
that people may now...
Some will take the view
of Keith, you know,
just move on and that’s it,
it’s over, I won’t talk about it
any more, and I’m sure
you won’t be alone in that, Keith.
I mean, others might be thinking,
well, are there any loopholes
here in this new system that we’re
all being asked in England
and in Scotland to adopt from today
in terms of test and protect,
or test and isolate?
Because if there are any loopholes
and it appears there were
a few loopholes when it came
to going all the way up
to County Durham when we all thought
we might have to stay at home,
in fact, if there are any loopholes,
should we hear about them now
rather than perhaps find out later?
Well, what we’ve seen so far
is people really are consciously
following the guidance.
And in fact, the guidance
has included recognising
that some situations will
be more difficult.
For instance,
if you’re looking after somebody
who’s particularly vulnerable,
you have a childcare situation...
So if you have a childcare
situation, then, Helen,
since you mentioned it,
if you have a problem with childcare
and you happen to be one
of the people who is identified
as someone that has to stay
at home for two weeks,
you may not necessarily have to do.
You clearly have to make sure
that your child is safe,
as any parent should do so.
But for instance...
So if you have to leave home
to do that, even if you’ve been
told to self—isolate,
you can do that?
Well, if you’re contacted
because you’re a contact of somebody
who’s got symptoms and told
to isolate home,
you should be able
to do so with your child.
And everyone will
have their scenarios.
But no, just to be clear,
because it is important,
because we all to have to adjust to
this now, this new system.
So if you are told to self—isolate
at home for two weeks,
either because you have symptoms
or you’ve been in close contact,
with someone has symptoms,
but you have problems with that
and you find that difficult
because of childcare issues,
you can behave otherwise,
you don’t have to self—isolate?
You should follow the guidance.
But I don’t think anyone would
suggest that you should do that,
that you should have a child
in an unsafe situation.
So follow the guidance
unless you can’t.
No, that’s not what I’m
saying, actually, at all.
You should absolutely...
You should follow the guidance.
And that’s been the case
all the way through.
People should follow the guidance.
But you’re saying unless...
The guidance has always said
that safety would be a factor
and you should be clearly
a responsible parent.
But I mean, I think what’s really
important is that people
follow the guidance,
and through doing that,
that’s how we manage to keep
the infection rate under control,
and so life can get back to normal,
or closer to normal,
which would be so much
better for everybody.
Can I say to Keith...?
Briefly.
Keith is partially right,
But why we haven’t moved
on is because there’s been no
apology, no contrition,
and the doubling down on saying that
you can drive 60 miles
to test your eyesight.
And Michael Gove’s touring
television studios to say that’s
allowable because he was preparing
to go back to work is treating
the public like fools,
And that’s why people
haven’t moved on.
John Swinney.
I think the whole issue for me comes
down to the point that
when Dominic Cummings made this
journey, everybody was told you’ve
got to stay at home,
and the reasons why you were able
to leave home were really,
really, really limited.
And quite clearly Dominic Cummings
broke those rules to make
the journey that he made,
and Ian Murray is absolutely right —
the ludicrous explanation
that the thing you do when you’re
worried about your eyesight
is drive your car for 60 miles
is just beyond credibility.
So the worry I have about all
of this is that it has that effect
that you’ve talked about,
that Alison talked about in her
question, that it essentially
undermines public confidence
and public compliance.
This has been a really
difficult pandemic for any
government to handle —
it’s a challenge for us
in the Scottish Government.
But we saw polling information this
week which demonstrated very,
very high levels of public trust
and confidence in the actions
of the Scottish Government in how
we have handled this crisis.
Now, that doesn’t mean
there’s not been hardship.
It doesn’t mean that there’s not
been suffering, but it means we’ve
communicated clearly.
We’ve had tremendous consent
from members of the public
to the measures that we’ve had
to regrettably put in place.
And I worry that the Dominic
Cummings fiasco and the arrogance
that’s been demonstrated
by the Prime Minister
and by Dominic Cummings
and by all of the members,
of the Cabinet in the way that
they’ve expected us all to...
John, sorry to interrupt,
but it’s worth pointing out,
isn’t it, that when there
was a similar 3 similar issue
in Scotland, when the chief medical
officer who visited her second home,
Caroline Calderwood,
Nicola Sturgeon did let her go,
but initially did try to hang
onto her, as BorisJohnson
is hanging onto Dominic Cummings.
Well, when the story
about Catherine Calderwood broke,
the first thing that
Catherine Calderwood
did was apologise.
She accepted that she had made
a mistake, and the First Minister
said that Catherine Calderwood had
an important contribution to make
to the Scottish Government
about the clinical advice
that we required.
But the First Minister accepted,
as did Catherine Calderwood,
that the very act of her not
following the rules that she had set
out undermined those rules.
So she resigned within 2A hours.
Now, that was...
So what was different here?
Catherine Calderwood apologised.
She accepted there was a potential
damage to public consent
and participation, and she resigned,
and she did so with dignity.
Dominic Cummings and BorisJohnson
have behaved with arroagance
and with disrespect to the public,
and they have insulted so many
members of the public who have
suffered so many things,
missed out on critical moments...
0K, 0K...
..the life journey of their loved
ones, and that should be confronted.
OK, I think it’ll keep Keith happy,
we’re going to move
on from Dominic Cummings.
Let’s hear a question
from Matthew, Matthew Denne.
Track and Trace appears to be
encountering delay issues
in the rolling out process,
both north and south of the border.
Why is it that other nations around
the world have managed
to expedite these processes?
And could the Scottish and the UK
governments look to adapt
using their successes rather
than too much reinventing
of the wheel?
Are you referring to things
like the app, for example, Matthew?
There are apps already
being used in Germany,
South Korea and other countries,
for example, whereas we are still
trying to get ours going.
Is that what you mean?
Yeah, Ithink, you know,
most reasonable people would concede
the Asian countries in particular,
whether it was swine flu or Sars,
etc, you know, they’re probably
ahead of the curve because they’ve
gone through pandemics previously.
So they’ve been able
to adapt technology.
But there’s plenty
of other examples.
Dare I say Australia,
you know, one of the ones
where they’ve been able to,
you know, roll out this programme
of track and trace with great speed
from effectively ground zero.
And when the World Health
Organization said at the start
the global pandemic,
we need a joined up approach
between nations, it almost feels
like the UK government,
reminds me of my father
when I was little, and you’d get
lost and he’d never ask
for directions because he had
a superiority complex about it.
And it just feels that way
with the UK at the moment.
You know, don’t be afraid to ask
for a bit of help rather than trying
to go off on your own tangent.
Well, Helen, let’s start with you.
Let me just ask about
the app actually, first.
Where are we with this app?
We know that the app will be brought
forwards in due course.
But the system that we have got
in place today is drawing
on over 25,000 callers
who will be implementing...
Because we were told
by Matthew Hancock that the app
was incredibly important
and we don’t have it.
So is itjust that
it is not working?
What’s happening with it?
Just update us.
So the app will support us as we go
further down the path.
But the important thing is that
we’ve got to a point...
I’m just trying to find out where
we are with the app because it is...
Is it not working?
Are there technical problems?
Just fill us in.
I’m not personally
working on the app.
But the important thing
is we have a system in place
which we’ve been able to launch
today, which means that it
will support some of the easing
of lockdown measures.
And we have actually to pick up,
when we do look at overseas
and what other countries are doing,
we do absolutely look to make sure
that we draw on the best
of what you see elsewhere.
And we have also got to a point,
though, that we can launch the NHS
Test and Trace system because we’ve
now got the number of cases and
the infection rate under control.
So we’re actually in a position
that it will really work,
to do the contact tracing
and the isolating.
And then, because we’re
all getting to grips with how
this is going to work.
So if we develop symptoms,
we contact one of these tracers,
I’m not sure who we contact
actually, but we contact somebody.
So if you develop symptoms,
you should go home and isolate
and then you should order a test
which you can do online
or by phoning 119.
So you inform 119 that you think
you might have symptoms
and you ask for a test.
And then, if you test positive,
you are asked to then
supply details of who you’ve been
in contact with.
Correct.
But what do you, without the app?
What do you do about all the people
you’ve been in contact
with when you don’t know their name,
their email address,
their phone number?
How’s that going to work?
So people who you were on public
transport with or in the shop
with, the shopkeeper.
So this goes hand in hand
with social distancing.
So for instance, if you’ve been
keeping a social distance
and being two metres apart,
that wouldn’t count as a contact.
No, but for people where you have
been closer, you know,
either in your workplace or perhaps
because you go on public transport,
without the app, how
are you going to know who these
people are, the people that we don’t
have the details for?
It’s important when you’re out
and about that you’re following
the social distancing rules...
But sometimes, sometimes
as the government has accepted,
it’s not always going to be
possible, particularly
in a work environment.
So when you don’t necessarily know
all the people you’ve been in closer
than two—metre contact with,
without the app, how
you’re going to find them?
Well, I think you’ll find a lot
of people will know people that
they’ve spent sustained,
close contact with.
You would know about that.
And that’s what you will talk
through with the contact tracers
so that they can then contact them
and this is a system,
this is a known way of dealing
with a pandemic and controlling it.
So, we’re not making this up.
This is a system
that is known to work.
Are we ready, Layla?
Well, it sounds as though we’re
getting there with the human contact
tracers, as has been discussed.
Clearly, it’s only just launched.
There are going to be operational
issues as it starts to bed in.
Hang on, we were told
it was going be world beating
on Monday by the Prime Minister.
Well, I don’t think that anyone
in the NHS needs it to be world
beating so much as just
really, really effective.
And that’s what we’re hoping for.
And at the moment,
it’s just kicked off.
We don’t yet know what it’s going be
like, but we are strongly hoping
that this is going to be a really
effective way of working.
The app question is interesting
because of course, we were promised
that the app would be here as part
of that system.
And in some ways we don’t need to be
really distressed that it’s
not there on day one because it’s
only part of the system.
It’s not the main
part of the system.
It’s an adjunct.
It will be something that
will improve our ability to find
people who are at risk and make sure
that they’re able to
quarantine and be safe.
But I think that this is really more
of a challenge that we keep
on being promised things
are going to be here
and then they’re not.
And it’s part of what I was saying
before about just eroding
people’s confidence.
The NHS has had lots
of disappointments whether they’ve
been you know, they’ve been promised
PPE coming on a plane from Turkey
and then it hasn’t come
or they’ve been promised PPE
that was going to work.
And then suddenly it’s
substandard in some way.
There’s lots of expectations that
are raised and then they’re dashed.
And I think that what we’re hearing
from health leaders is,
promise things that you’re able
to deliver when you’re
able to deliver them.
And that will really help to build
staff confidence and help to build
patient confidence.
Ellen, you wanted to come in.
Yes.
Just taking up on that last point
as well, there is a huge disconnect
between what we hear on the daily
briefings and the reality
and the implementation of these
policies on the ground,
and having that confidence
in the infrastructure can deliver
what we’re being promised.
And it’s really incomprehensible why
the UK was so unprepared.
I mean, countries like Turkey have
been testing and tracking
since the start with a relatively
low death toll.
And indeed, as you were saying
in the panel, we were told we’d get
a world heating system.
But what’s being rolled out now
is only the basics of what we should
have expected weeks ago.
We’re not testing
asymptomatic cases.
Tests are only available online.
This should be available locally,
I would have thought.
And itjust appears that
once again, the world
has beaten us to it.
Sean.
I’m just wondering how
useful this app will be.
Dr Hannah Fry said in
2017 in a BBC pandemic,
the biggest citizen experiment,
she did of its kind,
for the next pandemic like this,
most of the things about coming out
from that where about access
to Wi—Fi, having the money to pay
for Wi—Fi, Wi—Fi in your home,
whether you have a phone that
would be able to have this app
and you’d be able to download it.
My mum’s over 70 and I don’t know
if she would be able to navigate
something like that.
David?
Layla, I think you were being too
kind there and being very easy
on the Conservatives
with your comment.
Because the First Minister today,
of Scotland, she said,
she was reticent to announce
the move from lockdown that we’re
moving into in Scotland now.
And I understand where she’s coming
from, because we’ve got to a point
now where for me personally,
I have a lot more questions.
I may not be her biggest fan,
but coming out of every day
and giving us the briefings she’s
given us, and then for
the Westminster parliament to do
what’s happened over the last few
weeks, and that mistrust.
Nobody’s going to tell me that,
I don’t want to talk
about the Cummings incident,
the height of government,
the power they’ve got,
things they could do,
people could get things done.
It’s not like anything else
that’s ever happened.
This pandemic is hitting at all,
hitting us all hard.
The trust is gone.
And I don’t understand how
you could sit there and turn around
and say to us that we’ve got,
to get the pandemic in control...
To get the pandemic under control,
you need the public on your side.
And that’s not what we’ve seen
from the Westminster government.
Ruth.
Hi, thank you, Fiona.
My question is, this track and trace
system, what happens if nobody
volunteers themselves?
My understanding is it’s
a voluntary system.
What happens if people don’t
give their name, for example?
What happens in that situation?
How is that going to be handled?
I mean, John Swinney,
it’s an interesting point,
actually, because obviously,
if you do put yourself forward,
A, if you suggest that
you’ve got symptoms,
you realise you’re going to be
in quarantine for
the next two weeks,
and also, all the other people that
you mentioned you’ve
been in contact with,
you know, for a sustained period
of time or less than two metres,
you’re effectively dobbing them in,
if you like, and they’re going
to have to self—isolate as well.
So what, to Ruth’s point,
because obviously you’ve got
the same issue in Scotland
as in England,
what if people don’t
put themselves forward?
I think this is the link
to the first question
that we’ve just had.
The recent why we’ve been successful
in reducing the prevalence
of coronavirus is because
of massive volumes of public
participation and compliance.
And the same applies
to the track, trace,
isolate and support strategy,
test and protect, that we’re
putting out in Scotland.
It relies on people coming forward
where they have symptoms, indicating
that they have those symptoms.
And then for us pursuing
the contacts, obviously they’ll be
privacy applied to essentially
the source of the virus
that’s been drawn to the attention
of other individuals.
But it fundamentally relies
on public participation,
public trust and public confidence.
And that’s why I really appreciate
the comments that David made
about how the First Minister has
communicated about the challenges
that are inherent in
handling a pandemic.
And we need to have that similar
level of communication and consent
from members of the public,
in wrestling with the contact
tracing strategy.
It is a bit unfair to lay
absolutely everything
and Dominic Cummings’ door.
I’m no apologist, but nonetheless,
there’ll be other factors
that might influence whether people
want to comply in terms of
can they afford to take the time off
work, that kind of thing.
Alex, Matthew’s question
is why is it that other nations
have managed to do this faster?
And could the Scottish and UK
governments have learned anything
from these and therefore done
it faster ourselves?
Well, I think on the
second part of that,
the obvious answer has to be yes.
And this is one of the many,
many things that will be considered
by the inevitable series
of public inquiries
that will follow the eventual
conclusion of this emergency.
You know, one of the ironies
here is that, you know,
one of the fiercest critics
of what you might term
the dysfunction of the British state
or the Whitehall apparatus is one
Dominic Cummings.
He thinks that we need
to fundamentally rethink, reimagine,
reorganise the entire
business of government.
I happen to think
that some of his diagnosis
is quite persuasive.
He is, of course, now in a position
to do something about it.
And he’s discovering that curing
something is rather more
difficult than diagnosing it.
And I think that that is something
that is a long—term challenge
for the British state.
You know, at the moment,
in terms of how viable this contact
tracing operation is going to be,
an awful lot of that does depend
on government communication.
And that is one of the areas
where I think we have seen
BorisJohnson actually, you know,
fail — and demonstrably so.
He does not give the impression
of being on top of his brief.
He does not inspire
public confidence.
And that is a significant feeling
at a time
and in a crisis where communication,
clarity and consistency
of communication are,
if not half the job,
then certainly a significant
proportion of the Prime Minister’s
job, or First Minister’sjob,
or anybody in a leadership
position at present.
0K, Helen, do you want
to respond to that?
Well, actually, one thing
I want to pick up is that
the success of the next phase does
rely on people being...
absolutely being responsible
and coming forwards
and booking the test.
Just in terms of what Alex
was saying, BorisJohnson
failing as a communicator.
I actually think
he’s an excellent communicator
and also very effective
at motivating the troops.
But I do think, I know that you can,
of course, criticise
any stage of the pandemic,
if only this or if only only that,
but also that actually
extraordinary things have happened.
Extraordinary things
have been achieved.
A huge growth in the volume of
testing at incredible pace, given...
We have got the second highest
death toll in the world
in absolute numbers.
So, I think, I think we should...
We are absolutely looking
at what other countries are doing.
I think one thing we do know is,
is that now is not the moment
where we can actually really
compare those kind of things
between different countries.
But the important thing
is that every life lost
is somebody who we mourn
and with sadness.
But we also need to make sure
that we are able to move on and keep
the infection rate under control
and try and begin to get life more
in the direction of normal now.
Ian.
Well, Ithink, Fiona,
one of the key features of this
whole pandemic has been
the lack of a coordinated
international response.
And I’m tempted to say
at this point,
could viewers in Scotland
please turn over to BBC Two?
Please don’t, if you don’t mind!
We can’t even get the four
nations to work together.
So the explanation that Helen
gave at the very start
of her answer to this question
is different in Scotland.
It’s going to be different in Wales
and different in Northern Ireland,
and why we don’t have coordination
across the UK is one of the big
questions that people keep asking.
And let’s not forget,
and Layla’s absolutely right,
the reason we are so far behind
in international terms on this track
and trace is because we abandoned
that as a principle back in early
March, and have only come
round to realising
that’s the only way out of this.
And the key elements of that,
if I canjust finish on this point,
you have to test, test, test.
This goes all the way back
to what the World Health
Organization said in January.
England has a dreadful testing
record,
and you’re going to have
to do at least a quarter
of a million a day to get anywhere
near this being proper.
And that’s what
we’ve been calling for.
And Scotland has one of the worst
testing rates in the entire world.
Until that’s resolved,
this system cannot operate properly
to keep people safe.
John. John Swinney, do you want
to come back on it?
Well, we’re now in the situation
where Scotland has the capacity
to do 15,000 tests on a daily basis.
But you’re not doing
anything like those numbers.
Sorry to interrupt, but you’re not
doing anything like those numbers.
15,000.
Well, we’ve got capacity
in place to now do that,
when it’s at the most critical
moment when we’ve
suppressed the virus.
And we have the capacity to do
the contact tracing.
We’ve got the communications
in place to set that out.
We’ve had that in place
at the critical moment
where we begin to relax
some of the great restrictions
that have been in place.
So the strategy has come together
in exactly the right timing to
make sure that we have the capacity
in place to provide the support that
individuals in the country require.
Just to be clear, John, what’s
stopping you reaching that capacity?
What’s stopping you
reaching the capacity?
You’ve got capacity
for 15,000 tests, for example,
and you’re doing
nothing like those numbers.
Well, we’re constantly expanding
the range of individuals
who are able to get tests.
So, for example, we are doing
a great deal more availability
of testing within care homes.
We have mobile testing services
moving around the country.
We have much more capacity
available for people to go to
to get particular tests.
We’ve got availability in place
for key workers and for home care
workers and for those
delivering services,
so a whole range of different areas
where we’ve expanded the capacity
and the eligibility to
make sure that individuals
can get the tests requirement.
0K. Ian, very briefly.
The epicentre of this pandemic
is in our care homes in Scotland.
Over half of all the deaths
are now in care homes,
and 46% of all deaths
are in care homes in Scotland.
We are still not testing
care home patients.
We’re still not testing
on a regular basis care home staff.
And you can’t talk about capacity.
You have to talk
about test delivery.
It’s simply not happening yet.
Yes, we are.
We’re doing all that, Ian.
Not with the care homes
that get in touch with me daily,
whose patients, residents and staff
are not being tested.
Alex, you wanted to come in.
Sorry, there’s two Alexes.
I’m confusing things greatly.
My question is, without
the antibody, the fact that people
know they’ve already been infected,
how is this trace
and trace going to work?
Am I going to have to self—isolate
over and over again?
If I come into contact
with someone once,
am I going to have
to take 1A days off?
If I come into contact with someone
else, do I take another 1A days off?
People who are self—employed
and other people
are not going to be manage that,
it’s not going to be
possible for people.
I mean, this is the tricky
thing, isn’t it?
Because, as Alex is saying,
you might have
to self—isolate more than once.
And let’s just remind
ourselves what that means.
That means, for example,
if you have to share
a bathroom with your family,
you have to use it a different
time, and then you have
to wipe it all down.
I think you put your rubbish
in several bags when you put it out.
I mean, you have to keep away
from your entire family
and you might have to do
this several times.
We’re not asking people to isolate
within their households.
So you’re not worried
about if they infect their family?
If you’re being asked to...
I should distinguish
between if you’re being asked
to isolate if you’ve got symptoms.
If you’re being asked
to self—isolate at home with your...
We’re not asking anyone
in the household to isolate.
But it’s during that period
where you are in the possible
incubation period
to see whether you might
contract the virus.
And I recognise that there is a risk
that you might be asked
to do that more than once,
but if people follow
social distancing...
So if people are following social
distancing and minimising
their contact, so if they’re having
to go to a workplace to work,
but social distancing
in the workplace is really
important, because that’s how
you avoid becoming somebody
who’s a contact of the sort that
needs to isolate.
In England, you can
go to barbecues now,
I think in Scotland,
correct me if I’m wrong, you can’t.
You can.
Yes, you can.
You can go to a barbecue.
Yes, because two households,
no more than eight people.
It’s no more than eight
people, six in England,
two households can meet,
socially distance,
in public or private outdoor spaces.
So you could have a barbecue.
This is how ridiculous
this whole situation is.
It’s eight in Scotland.
It’s six in England.
Why can’t we just get
a UK—wide approach
and everyone works together?
And also a barbecue
all keeping two metres distance,
that’s going to be quite...
I mean, that’s a heck of a garden
you’re going to have to have
to accommodate that.
For no more than 15 minutes.
We’re asking people to gradually...
It’s small steps to try and
make life be a little bit better.
We’re alljust trying to make sense
of exactly how it works
since we’re going to have
to be doing this.
Jeanette, you just
wanted to come in.
Let me bring you in.
I work from home.
This track and trace has
the ability to close my business
down every single week.
And I don’t know
what I’m going to do.
I’m already closed.
Financially, it’s been a nightmare.
And now, if any of my staff
or any of my family,
or they go into any of the houses
to clean or do anything,
we’re closed.
And I was wondering,
who is going to pick
up the pieces for me?
Because we know the small businesses
who work from home
have already been missed out
on everything.
And now we’ve got track and trace
that could close me down again every
single week or have girls going off
sick because they’ve been
to vulnerable houses,
vulnerable places.
And they’ve been doing theirjob
and Ijust don’t know what to do.
Is the Government
going to sort this out?
You run a cleaning company,
don’t you, Jeanette?
You’ve got various people going out
to clean up people’s homes.
50, John Swinney,
what is the compensation
package going to be?
I mean, so if you are someone...
Either you’re Janette,
who runs a company or you’re someone
who works with Jeanette
and a lot of small companies
are in a similar position.
They suddenly get either
they get symptoms.
You’ve got to self—isolate
for the next 1A days
and let’s see what happens.
What compensation will
there be for them?
I think the point thatJeanette
makes, it illustrates the fact
that there has to be ongoing support
arrangements in place
for individuals and for businesses
to make sure that people can
navigate their way through what’s
going to be a difficult period,
if they have to participate
in contact tracing.
So what will they be,
John, very specifically?
Because the provision
for the self—employed, for example,
come to an end in about three days.
People working forJeanette
are self—employed.
So what provision will be
put in place for them?
That’s what I was coming onto.
There has to be a need
for an ongoing scheme of support
to assist individuals
in that respect.
Which is why we continue
to press the UK Treasury
to recognise this is not
a short—term issue.
This is a long—term issue
that we’ve got to see sustained.
The indications from
the Treasury are, for example,
on the furlough scheme,
that’s going to be constrained
in August by the Chancellor.
And that’s a very damaging
move, because we know
that the implications of Covid
are going to be with
us for a long time.
So we’re appealing to the UK
Government to recognise
the longevity of this problem
and put in place the support
to enable that to be the case.
0K, well, we’ve got Helen Whately
here, John, so let’s ask her.
So someone inJeanette’s position,
very specifically, self—employed,
that comes to an end
in the next few days,
what will the Government do
for people like her?
So, I don’t...
On this I agree withJohn,
and the importance of having
the support for people who,
for instance, are required to
isolate because of test and trace.
It’s up to the UK Government.
50 what are you going to do?
And I know that that must be
something that the Chancellor
specifically to look at is on the
self—employment question.
We know that for those
who are employed, they will be
eligible for statutory sick pay.
If they are asked to isolate.
For someone inJeannette’s
position specifically,
she’s come on the programme
this evening saying,
what are you going to do
for people like me?
What is the Government doing?
I can’t pre—empt what the...
The decision of the Chancellor
will make on that.
But it is absolutely true
that we do need to make sure
that people are able to afford
what they need in life
and recognise the costs of this.
Also that we do need
to have something
which is economically sustainable.
So we need to have a way to be
beginning to restart the economy
because of the huge amount
of economic support that has gone
to those who are in employment,
those who own businesses
across the economy,
a huge amount of support.
We now need to get the economy
back up and running.
And more people going back to work.
Well, I’m sure Janette
will wait with great interest
to see what comes out.
As the Prime Minister said today,
we will look after everybody locally
who was affected by this.
So let’s see what happens.
Let’s hear now from
Rena Cuthbertson. Rena.
Good evening, Fiona,
good evening, panel.
Was the policy indecision
regarding the emptying of hospital
beds with the patients not
being tested and the outrageous
consequences on elderly citizens
a planned arrangement?
And if so, does this not highlight
the lack of value and respect
that we place in the elderly?
So was it a planned arrangement
allowing people back into care homes
without being tested?
And does it highlight the lack
of value and respect?
Yes, Alex. Alex Massie.
The care home situation I think
is one of those areas
where governments in all parts
of the United Kingdom faced
a terrible set of choices.
You know, in hindsight,
as Nicola Sturgeon said this week,
they would probably make
some decisions differently.
You know, at the time
when people were released
from hospital into care
homes, it was...
They feared that the NHS
and the hospitals were going to be
overwhelmed with Covid cases.
And so, you know, what do we do
with people who are,
you know, delayed discharge,
bed blocking, whatever?
Well, get them out, almost
regardless of their circumstance.
And that now, because the sort
of tsunami of Covid cases
didn’t quite materialize,
that now looks to be
a terrible mistake.
And obviously, with hindsight,
it was a mistake.
But at the time it was made,
I think it’s reasonable
for politicians to say,
well, but this was the choice
that we had available to us.
But you can only do that, I think,
you can only get the public to trust
you if you communicate with candor.
If you allow that mistakes will be
made in a fiercely complicated
and unprecedented set of situations.
But you can’t just allow that
mistakes that will be made.
You have to actually sort
of admit to them and take
ownership of them as well.
If you treat it, if we treat people
like adults, there is a chance
that they will understand
the position you’re coming from.
But you can’t just sort of deny that
any mistakes took place.
And it seems to me to be
infantilizing the government’s,
of government ministers wherever
they happen to be to try and pretend
that that could be the case.
You know, people understand
that this is a really, really
difficult situation to manage.
And that’s why even though patience
may be beginning to wear thin,
I think there is still a residual
degree of goodwill of
the government, if government can
can be shown to be responsive
to this situation, can show
that it is accepting and taking
ownership of mistakes and the care
home situation is
clearly one of them.
You can’t go around prattling
on about how, you know,
thrown a protective ring around care
homes at the same time, as,
you know, thousands and thousands
of people are dying in care homes.
And the final point
of the question there,
you know, it is clear,
I think, that for a long,
long time, care homes have
been sort of overlooked,
too often forgotten part
of the whole health and social care
network, and that sometimes perhaps
seen as a convenient place to park
people whose presence elsewhere
might be deemed undesirable
or too complicated.
Let’s hearfrom Elaine
in the audience.
You’ve had your hand
up for a short while.
Hi, Fiona.
I agree with Alex.
I think at the start of this
pandemic, it was a tsunami and no
one really knew what they would do.
And I think the choice when we saw
those horrific images
from the Italian hospitals
of patients lying in corridors,
couldn’t catch a breath,
I think the right decision was made
at this time to make sure
the hospitals were clear
that we wouldn’t have those images
in front of our newspapers.
And I think Nicola Sturgeon has
looked back, like Alex said there,
and thought, you know,
in hindsight, she probably
would have done things differently.
I think the choice at the time
of having that tsunami of patients,
you know, with Covid,
versus letting elderly patients go
into a care home where they probably
thought that was going to be a safer
place for them at the time
and was probably...
It was a lose—lose choice now that
we look back but at the time,
we were trying to get away
from those images of what we were
seeing all over the press
with people not being able
to have a hospital bed.
And we didn’t, it didn’t come
to that, which is a good thing.
So I think it is a lose—lose,
it’s an unfortunate situation.
Rena, you wanted to come back in,
you asked the question?
Yes, thanks very much.
I think in terms of the planning,
you know, we have known about this
since the end of December.
ﬂ
I know it’s not a long time but what
has been clear from the start, the
most
most vulnerable in the communities
are the elderty.
are the elderly. And we let the
are the elderty. And we let the
people --
are the elderly. And we let the
people —— people leave hospital
peopla -- peopla leave hospital
without
people —— people leave hospital
without being tested and put them in
rare
care homes.
We put them back in their own homes,
to be cared for by home care workers
or by support agencies or by family.
And nobody was tested.
And so I knew there was tough
decisions, and I’m no’ just talking
about the Scottish Government,
I mean generally
right across the UK.
And I know we were flooded
with pictures, you know,
but maybe if the cameras
were in and out the care homes,
we would be flooded wi’ as many
pictures of people dying
in care homes horrendously.
Ijust think, you know,
there’s no winners in this.
And I know it’s been difficult,
and I know that the whole thing
is new to us, and Ijust think
they’re the most vulnerable
and they are always, I feel,
the first to be forgotten.
You know, we clap and we applaud
Captain Tom, and many of his
generation have just been left
to die in care homes,
and Ijust think it’s outrageous.
And I thinkjust the other thing,
Fiona, to say is every time
the Conservative member speaks,
all we hear is, well,
you know, we cannot compare
ourselves to the countries,
let’s put the Dominic Raab to bed,
let’s not talk about anything that’s
showing us up to be,
you know, the unorganised, em...
0K, Helen, I’ll give
you a chance to respond
to that in a minute,
but thank you, Rena, for that,
I’m not trying to cut you off there.
In terms of what Rena is saying,
what Alex’s saying as well,
Nicola Sturgeon saying,
you know, with hindsight,
which of course is a wonderful
thing, I might have
done things differently.
When it comes to care homes,
specifically asking you, what would
you have done differently?
I think the circumstances that have
been narrated by all three
of the comments that have spoken,
I can’t do it disagree
with their analysis.
At the time that Covid
was coming towards us,
we realised and we thought the best
thing to do was to ensure that older
people who were being accommodated
in hospitals when there was no
clinical need for them to be
there would be better
protected in care homes,
because if there was an influx
of Covid cases into hospitals,
where vulnerable elderly people
were, the danger of cross—infection
was very high, so the judgment was,
if it was safe to do so,
if the risk assessment
was undertaken, those individuals
could be accommodated either at home
with support or in a care home.
And there’s been constant political
pressure on us to reduce delayed
discharges in hospitals,
to get all the people out
of hospitals and into
care homes situations.
So we followed that approach.
But, of course, we have discovered
just how brutal Covid is to older
members of our society
and our community.
John, sorry to interrupt,
but surely we could see
from the other countries quite how
brutal coronavirus was to
the older generation —
that evidence was already there.
Yes, but my point is that we judged
that the best and safest way
to support those individuals
was in a care home setting
or at home with support,
rather than the hospital setting,
which would be the epicentre
of handling coronavirus cases.
0K, well, let mejust turn
to Layla for a moment,
because hearing what Alex Massie’s
saying, whatJohn’s saying, I mean,
there were other countries before us
grappling with this,
and they admitted people from
hospitals back into their homes,
but in some cases in some country,
they put them into quarantine,
special places or quarantine
within care homes.
Is there anything we could have
learned from that, reasonably,
or is Alex right, that actually,
you know, this is the best we could
have done in the circumstances?
It’s incredibly hard to say.
I look at all what other countries
have done, and as you say,
there’s been some sort of quarantine
centres or interim places to go.
It’s not exactly clear.
I mean, obviously, what has happened
with Covid—19 in care homes has been
an absolute tragedy.
But the reasons for that are not
quite as clear cut as sometimes
people are assuming.
So we hear people say, oh,
it’s because everyone
was sent out of hospital.
But actually, when you look
at the data, it’s not totally clear
that that was something that has
created this challenge.
You think it might have spread
in care homes anyway?
Well, that’s the thing.
I mean, at the end of the day,
we don’t know when this
first started circulating.
It looks as though when you started
testing has a real impact on this.
Looking at other countries and care
homes, it looks like people
going in and out of care homes,
potentially, of course, playing
its role, and while we really,
really want an answer to that,
it’s too early to figure
out what’s going on.
But we can see that we’d need
an answer, and we need to learn,
and I guess that what I’d say
is that this, it really
exposes the underinvestment
and the undervaluing of social care
for successive governments.
And what we really need
here is a bit of a long—term plan.
We’ve seen what’s going on in social
care, and it’s really great
that the Government is now,
you know, giving some money
towards social care to say,
goodness, we need to bolster,
for example, your infection
control mechanisms.
Our members have been telling us
for ages that while hospitals
are starting to get PPE in,
care homes have been in a much worse
position, there’s a lot
of disparity here.
So there’s new funding so that care
homes are able to get better
infection control processes in place
and things like that.
But that’s a short—term fix,
and when we look at this,
we think, goodness, the moment
is here for social care reform.
And what are we going
to do about it?
What’s the Government
going to do about it?
Ian.
Well, I think the chronic
underfunding of social care
across the United Kingdom
and in Scotland, the chickens
are now coming home to roost.
And this was a problem under Labour
governments as well.
It’s been a problem for a long time.
But we need some kind of political
consensus to fund social care.
We’ve been talking about
this now for too long.
But let’s go through
what we already knew.
We knew that the prevalence of this
disease was in older people,
it was much more severe
in older people.
We knew from the 2014 report
and task force for social care
that there was 3A recommendations,
very few of them were
implemented in Scotland.
We knew in 2015 that the Government
and the Scottish Government had said
they would eradicate bed blocking —
it wasn’t done.
We knew from the Silver Swan report
there was a problem with PPE
and a problem with testing if we had
a global pandemic.
All of that has since happened,
and the decision was made
by the Scottish Government to move
912 elderly people from
hospital to care homes.
Now, that in itself is a big
decision, and it’s a decision
I completely agree withJohn,
these big decisions have to be made.
But the key thing here was that
we’re taking from hospital to care
homes without testing.
So we’re essentially exporting
the disease on the people that it
affects the most into care.
We have just heard Layla say
that we can’t be sure that
that was the critical deciding
factor in terms of
exponential growth.
Well, 46% of all coronavirus
deaths in Scotland have
been in our care homes.
This is the epicentre
of coronavirus.
And that’s why, because we sent
people there without testing,
we sent people there
without the lack of PPE.
And the figures, you
looked at them earlier.
Scotland does have one of the worst
testing rates in the world,
And the biggest problem
with that is trying to get testing
into the social care sector.
We’re only doing between 4—6,000
a day, so how can we possibly
protect the residents and the staff
in care homes without fundamentally
testing them regularly and making
sure that they are safe?
Helen, let mejust bring you back
to Rena’s original question,
which is, was the policy a planned
arrangement, putting patients
in care homes from hospitals
who hadn’t been tested?
And does it highlight the lack
of value and respect we place
on elderly citizens?
So every step of the way,
the Government followed scientific
guidance on what to do,
and clinical guidance and...
Hang on, there was also government
guidance, so April the 2nd,
the UK Government guidance
was negative tests are not required
for asymptomatic elderly patients
prior to transfers into care home.
That was government advice.
Government guidance was informed
by the science and by the scientific
guidance, but what has happened over
time is, of course,
that we have learned.
So, for instance, we’ve learned,
and the world has learned,
that actually we have a situation
with people who may be asymptomatic
carriers of the virus.
And it’s particularly hard,
we now know, with older people
who don’t display the most common
set of symptoms.
So there’s a particular reason,
which is why we’re now doing testing
of all staff and residents in care
homes for older people,
those with dementia,
exactly to do that, to pick up those
who may be asymptomatic,
as well as those who have symptoms,
because we’re learning.
Butjust to go back and pick up
on some of the comments
from the audience, I mean,
some really, really
thoughtful comments.
But one thing I will say is that
when I became the care
minister on February Mth,
and since then, I mean,
so much of my time and so many
people in government
has been on how we can
support social care,
both care homes and home care
through the pandemic.
And we know it’s really hard.
One of the things that we saw early
on was looking at Spain,
and the situation where the army
went into care homes
where they’d been abandoned
and people had just been left,
and left to die, even from neglect.
And we’ve put in place
a new reporting system, so we know
what’s going on in care homes.
So we get a picture of where there
might be risks of that.
I should also say, and I talk
so much to care homes,
that we should recognise that
in England, over 60% of care homes
have not had a Covid outbreak.
So actually, lots of care homes have
managed to do an amazing job
in keeping Covid out
of their care homes.
And many of those have had it now
recovered from that outbreak
and things are getting better.
John Swinney, you wanted to come in,
we’re almost out of time,
so briefly, Ijust want to let
you have another word.
I think the point I wanted to make
was that in Ian’s last answer,
he talked about the need
for there to be measures
to tackle delayed discharges,
and then when the Government tackles
the issue of delayed
discharge, we get criticised
for it by Ian Murray.
There are really difficult decisions
that have to be taken here,
with the best interests
of the population at heart.
Tough decisions in
tough circumstances.
And many of the measures we’ve taken
have supported care homes to make
sure that individuals have had
the resources and the equipment
and assistance in place to make
sure they were kept safe
in very difficult circumstance.
OK, I’m afraid, I know
you want to come back in,
but our hour is up.
Eleanor, I can see you’ve
got your hand up there
and we’ve run out of time,
so forgive me for not coming to you.
Tonight our questions came
from Glasgow, and thank
you so much to all of you.
Next week, we will have an audience,
a virtual audience from Southampton,
and after that from Cardiff.
So from now on, we’ll be looking
for 12 people to join our discussion
in the way that we have tonight
via video link.
So if you’d like to be part of that,
and I really hope that you will,
and you come from either of those
areas, do get in touch via the usual
way and then we will get
back in touch with you.
And of course, if you want
to continue the discussion,
you can join Adrian Chiles
and guests on Question Time
Extra Time, and that is
on 5 Live right now.
But I just want to say thank
you very much to the panel
for coming into the studio tonight,
and of course thank
you, John and Alex,
forjoining us down the line.
And thank you very much
to our guinea pigs this evening,
first time we’ve done this,
joining us from Glasgow,
I’m very grateful to all of you.
And of course, you at
home for watching.
From Question Time, bye—bye.
We’ve got to be able to be more open
and more able to talk about stuff.
Let it out. There’s people out there
that can help you.
It feels really overwhelming.
Theyjust can’t cope.
It felt like I couldn’t
talk to anyone,
and part of that was because
I was ashamed of being gay.
I remember thinking,
"I’m just going to end this."
This is such a hard thing
to define or even admit.
Mental health issues
can affect any one of us.
Talk. That’s half the healing.
We need to talk.
For a range of programmes
to help start your conversation,
go to BBC iPlayer.
If you’re stuck in a style rut...
I’m just not brave enough.
..you have come to the right place,
because I’ve got the perfect people
for the job.
How does it feel? Feels good.
That is such a wicked outfit.
I love it.
Confidence is through the roof now.
This is clothes shopping like
you’ve never experienced before.
Look good, feel great.
Brand—new You Are What You Wear.
You never get bored in Monaco.
There’s always this
picture
that we all swim in the caviar
all day long.
In Monaco, the helicopter’s
considered like a car.
Every morning, I’m like, "Oh,
my God, I’m living in a dream".
Step into a world
where too much is never enough.
28,000 euros. Would you like
another drink, sir?
There have been so many words
this week to describe
the Dominic Cummings situation —
what was it the Government used
officially to describe it?
'Entirely reasonabla.‘
Yeah.
"Entirely legal."
Then it moved on to it
being about "Following instincts."
Hmm.
And then it moved on a bit to...
"Move on!‘
Yes, more sort of end of story.
And then Durham Police said "might",
and that was briefly the most used
word on Twitter in Britain
at one point today.
And then there’s the words
the public have been using,
here is Emma Barnett from 5 live
with some of the words that have
been on her daily phone in.
Foolish, furious and bored.
More from Emma later in the podcast,
and plenty more words
on plenty more subjects.
But mostly about coronavirus.
Welcome to the Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same studio
for once, but two metres apart.
And Fergus in New Broadcasting
House, in a studio all to myself.
Aw!
Several miles away,
but still with us in spirit.
Now, it’s another one
of those milestones,
because the restrictions
on our movements in England,
certainly, get reviewed
every three weeks.
Today was one of the review days,
Boris johnson
was at the Downing Street podium
describing it all.
Some stuff we knew already,
so some primary school classes
going back in England from Monday.
Yep.
Some shops reopen in England
from the 15th ofJune. Yep.
Dentists, if they can...
Yes, Coronacasters who’ve been
taking a close interest in this,
dentistry is on the way back
in England at least.
On the 8th ofJune, if they’ve got
enough PPE and can operate safely.
And BorisJohnson officially
launched the start
of barbecue season with your mates.
Here’s how he did it.
We will allow up to six
people to meet outside,
provided those from different
households continue strictly
to observe social distancing rules
by staying two metres
apart at the moment.
As you know, people can meet in
parks, but not in private gardens.